This evening, Genesis chapter number 30,
we'll begin in verse number 25
and really go all the way down through chapter 31
in verse number 16 as we continue our journey
through the book of Genesis
and studying in this particular section of the book
through the life of Jacob.
And of course, in our previous two studies
through the book of Genesis,
we have learned of the sons of Jacob
as God has recorded for us 11 of those 12 sons
that are born here, that are mentioned, of course,
in chapter number, the end of chapter number 29
and then in chapter number 30.
Of course, Benjamin the 12th son
is not recorded his birth until chapter number 35.
We'll study the sons of Jacob
and of course mentioned many things
with regard to the events surrounding the birth
of these 12, 11 sons that are mentioned here
in this portion of scripture.
And of course, I believe that we're able to learn
valuable lessons of the importance
of keeping our eyes on the Lord
and walking with him and not allowing others
to influence our walk with the Lord
and to avoid, of course, as we looked at the carnality
and the envy that was present
within the relationships of Rachel and Leah
and how we need to avoid those things
and seek to honor the Lord with our lives.
And so we studied that portion of scripture.
Now, as we lead into the end of chapter number 30
and really into the beginning of chapter number 31,
we now find that the word of God is going to record for us
some of the events or circumstances, if you will,
that lead to Jacob's return to Canaan.
You'll remember that at the end of the conversation
between Jacob and his mom prior to leaving,
remember Rebecca said, and Terry with him a few days
in Genesis 27 and verse number 44,
we've made note that those few days turned into years
and was a situation in which she had never really expected
that it would result in the way that it did.
But now we find that these circumstances that are recorded
are really going to lead back to that time
in which Jacob would return to Canaan.
In fact, in verse number 25, he makes that known.
It says this in verse 25 of Genesis 30,
and it came to pass when Rachel had born Joseph
that Jacob said unto Laban,
send me away that I may go unto mine own place
and to my country.
And we find that that request is made.
I want you to notice verse number 43.
The word of God says that the man increased exceedingly
and had much cattle and maidservants and menservants
and camels and asses.
I've titled the message this evening
really from verse number 43 there,
that Jacob increased exceedingly.
As we look at this passage of scripture again,
we'll see some of the circumstances
that are surrounding his eventual return to Canaan.
We know that he's in this place for a purpose
and for a time.
In fact, we find that Jacob received that blessing
from his father Isaac in Genesis chapter number 28
with regard to leaving and going to Paddan Aram,
and we find that that's exactly where he is.
But notice as we look at this portion of scripture,
if you're taking notes, first of all,
his interaction with Laban.
We find that this interaction is recorded
in the portion of scripture.
We've read about the, of course, marriage
in chapter number 29 of Jacob,
and then of course as the sons are born
and all of that is provided to us.
And now we find that the text of scripture
focuses in on this interaction
that Jacob is going to have with Laban.
It begins with a request.
I've read verse 25 already,
and you find that at the end of verse number 25,
the request is given.
It's really straightforward.
It's a plain request.
He says, send me a way that I may go
into my own place, into my country.
He says, give me my wives and my children
for whom I have served thee,
and let me go for thou knowest my service,
which I have done thee.
And so the request is made.
It's a simple request.
We find that Laban responds,
and in his responses, it's recorded to us
in verse number 27.
We really find that Laban recognizes
the favor of God in the life of Jacob,
and even how it's impacted Laban's own life.
Notice what he says, and Laban said unto him,
I pray thee, if I have found favor in thine eyes,
tarry, and then notice what he says here
at the end of verse 27.
For I have learned by experience
that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
In fact, Jacob would reiterate this
as he has this interaction.
It says in verse 28, and he said,
appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said unto him, thou knowest how I have served thee,
and how thy cattle was with me.
For it was little which thou hadst before I came,
and is now increased unto a multitude,
and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming.
And now, when shall I provide for mine own house also?
And so we find that this interaction
begins with a request of departure.
It is followed up by this recognition of the favor,
the blessing of God that's been upon Jacob,
but that also has impacted Laban,
and he's recognized this blessing of God,
and as we notice the interaction,
we find that there's an agreement made
in the text of scripture.
Remember, there in verse number 28,
that Laban said, appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And we find that as you begin to look
through the passage of scripture,
that there's an agreement that is made.
In verse 31 through 34,
the terms of the agreement are laid out to us.
It says, and he said, what shall I give thee?
And Jacob said, thou shalt not give me anything.
If thou wilt do this thing for me,
I will again feed and keep thy flock.
I will pass through all thy flock today,
removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle,
and all the brown cattle among the sheep,
and the spotted and speckled among the goats,
and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come,
when it shall come for my hire before thy face.
Everyone that is not speckled and spotted among the goats,
and brown among the sheep,
that shall be counted stolen with me.
Notice what the Bible says in verse 34,
and Laban said, behold, I would,
it might be according to thy word.
There's an agreement that is made.
The terms of the agreement are spelled out.
We find that in the next several verses,
the Bible talks about the removal of those cattle
and the livestock, and we begin to read about
the process of breeding in which Jacob employs,
and all that takes place,
and it tells us in verse 35, that he removed that day,
that the he goats that were ring-streaked and spotted,
and all the goats that were speckled and spotted,
and everyone that had some white in it,
and the brown among the sheep,
and gave them into the hands of his sons.
I'm not gonna continue to read all of the passage
of scripture here, but we find that there's some practice
that is used, that is employed by Jacob
with regard to the selective breeding,
and we see that he obviously had some knowledge from God
with regard to those things,
but I want you to understand that as we look at
all of that process, that it really leads us
to our second thought this evening,
and that's not just the interaction with Laban,
but it's the increase from God,
the increase from the Lord.
We find that here as we get to verse number 43,
the Bible says, and the man increased exceedingly,
and had much cattle, and made servants,
and men servants, and camels, and asses,
and I want you to see where the scriptures tell us
that his increase is from the Lord.
In fact, in chapter number 31,
if you look down at verse number nine,
in this particular verse, we find that Jacob here
is speaking to Rachel and Leah, and he says this,
thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father,
and given them to me, and he's speaking specifically
about all of that breeding process,
and all that was taking place in verse 36,
down through verse number 42,
and as we think about the increase from the Lord,
we find really that this is fulfilled promise.
Go back, if you will, hold your place here,
and go back to chapter 28.
One thing that we can rejoice in
as we look at the word of God,
and as we study the scriptures,
and begin to examine the lives of those
that have gone before us,
and as we begin to think about our own lives,
is that we have a book that God has given us
that is full of promises.
When we think about the promises of God,
and we understand that Peter says this,
that they're exceeding great and precious promises,
and we sing songs such as Standing on the Promises,
and we think about the promises of God,
and the reality this evening is that we ought
to rejoice greatly for every promise
that God has given us.
In fact, we find that the Bible says this
in 2 Corinthians 1, in verse number 20,
for all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him, amen, unto the glory of God by us.
God's made some promises.
Here, as we think about the life of Jacob in particular,
and we see back in the 28th chapter,
as he would depart from his home,
not knowing all that would befall him,
it's Isaac that speaks to him.
Notice in verse number one,
the Bible says that Isaac called Jacob,
and blessed him, and charged him,
and said unto him,
thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paddan Aram,
and to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father,
and take thee a wife from thence
of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother.
And notice what he says in verses three and four.
And God Almighty bless thee,
and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee,
that thou mayest be a multitude of people,
and give thee the blessing of Abraham to thee,
and to thy seed with thee,
and that thou mayest inherit the land whereon thou art
a stranger which God gave unto Abraham.
And at that moment, after those words,
the Bible says that Isaac,
sent away Jacob, in verse number five.
And as Jacob was sent away,
it picks up and tells us in verse number 10
that Jacob went out from Beersheba and went toward Haran.
We've mentioned already in previous studies
that Paddan Aram is the chief city of Haran,
and he's going to the place
where he's been instructed to do so.
And it's during that journey
that he has that dream, that vision.
And notice as you pick it up with me
in verse number 13 of Genesis 28,
the Bible says that behold,
the Lord stood above it and said.
As you read verses 13 through 15,
I would say that you could summarize
these three verses of Scripture
by saying God has given Jacob some encouraging promises.
God is speaking directly to Jacob
and He's giving him some very specific promises.
It says, I am the Lord God of Abraham, thy father,
and the God of Isaac, the land whereon thou liest.
To thee will I give it and to thy seed.
Thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth
and thou shalt spread abroad to the west
and to the east and to the north and to the south.
And in thee and in thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
Notice, it's interesting because God is giving this promise
and He says the land whereon thou liest
in verse number 13, to thee will I give it
and to thy seed, but He's leaving that land, right?
He's departing from that place
because He's fleeing because of the circumstances
of the stolen blessing and all that took place.
And we find that God then says in verse number 15,
and behold, I am with thee
and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest
and will bring thee again into this land.
For I will not leave thee until I have done that
which I have spoken to thee of.
Now, those are some encouraging promises.
Begin to think about Jacob.
Of course, we know as we studied the 28th chapter
and I won't rehash everything that I've recently said
just a few weeks ago in Genesis chapter 28,
but this was a monumental event in the life of Jacob.
His life was changed.
We've likened this passage of Scripture
to when we were saved, when we were converted.
And you think about the promises that God gives to Jacob
in this portion of Scripture.
And then as we come to Genesis chapter number 30,
and we find that the passage ends in verse number 43
by speaking about the increase.
This man, it says, and the man increased exceedingly
and had much cattle and maidservants and menservants
and camels and asses.
And remember the Bible said there
that God was going to be with him.
He was gonna keep him in all places
and bring thee again into this land
for I will not leave thee.
Notice what he says, until I have done that
which I have spoken to thee of.
God was working and God was doing.
And we find that God is fulfilling his promises.
Can I say this?
God always fulfills his promises.
You have promises that you hold dear
as we sing the song standing on his promises,
as we take testimonies and we sing about
and testify about the promises of God,
we hold dear to those promises.
And we understand that God is faithful
and that God will honor his word.
I'm so thankful as we look at the word of God
and consider the promises.
Of course, there are some promises
that we look to in the word of God
that are promises that we would categorize
as being conditional promises.
Often when we speak about conditional promises,
we speak of promises that are oftentimes
the most common way that these promises are referred to
as if-then promise.
If you do this, then God promises to do this.
And when you think about those promises
and you consider that God has given us his very word,
if you do these things,
that God promises that he will do this.
And I'm thankful for that
because God has given us the instruction
with regard to these promises.
In fact, as you read Proverbs chapter number two,
there's a whole list of them
in that very passage of scripture of if-then promises.
But then as we come to the word of God,
we find that not only do we come across
conditional promises,
but we find that the word of God
contains unconditional promises.
Promises that God has made that have no impact
on what we do or do not do with regard to those promises.
Can I tell you that we sang about one of those this evening?
Coming again, right?
Did not Jesus give us a promise
that he was going to return?
That promise stands as an unconditional promise.
God himself has promised.
He said, let not your hearts be troubled.
You believe in God, believe also in me.
In my father's house are many mansions.
If it were not so, I would have told you.
I go to prepare a place for you.
And he said this, if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come again and receive you unto myself
that where I am, there ye may be also.
We find that the word of God says that Jesus,
as we would think about the truth
of the promise of his return,
that there are some, according to 2 Peter 3,
that mock that very promise
that we're speaking of this evening.
And they say, where is the promise of his return?
And Peter responds and says,
the Lord is not slack concerning his promise.
As some men count slackness.
But his long-suffering to us word,
not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance.
Listen, God is not slack concerning any of his promises.
What he hath promised, he will do.
And we ought to rejoice in that.
You know, he told us that his word
will not return unto him void,
that it will accomplish what he has set forth
for it to accomplish.
He's told us that we're to preach the word,
to be instant in season, out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort,
with all long-suffering and doctrine.
Why?
Because God's promised to use his word.
And as we take God at his word,
and we take the promises that he's given us,
and we claim those promises,
we can rejoice this evening
that as we look at the increase from the Lord,
as we look at what's taken place in the life of Jacob
over these years that he spent in this land,
and we see how God has fulfilled these promises
that he's made to Jacob.
As we evaluate our lives,
is it not true that we can see
how God has been faithful to the promises
that he's given us?
I'm thankful for that promise,
and often as we take testimony specifically
with regard to promises from his word,
we think of the promise of his presence.
We often quote Hebrews 13 in verse number five,
that portion of that verse of Scripture that says,
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
Isn't that precious?
We find that even in this text
that Jacob speaks about that very thing.
As we think about the increase from the Lord,
we find that there are fulfilled promises.
It tells us of much cattle, of maidservants,
of menservants, of camels and asses,
but we find that due to this increase from the Lord,
due to these fulfilled promises,
that we find that there's hostility that he faces.
And we find that here,
as we continue and move into the 31st chapter,
the Bible says that he heard the words of Laban's sons.
Notice what these sons of Laban are saying.
Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's,
and of that which was our father's,
hath he begotten all this glory.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban,
and behold, it was not toward him as before.
We find that there's this open hostility, if you will,
we begin to see how Jacob is going to speak
with Rachel and Leah with regard to his plan,
and really it goes back to where we started this evening
in verse number 25, when he says to Laban,
send me away, that I may go into mine own place,
into my own country.
He asks the question at the end of verse number 30,
when shall I provide for my own house also?
We find that as he would have this increase,
as he would experience this blessing of the Lord,
that there comes some opposition, if you will,
there's some hostility that he faces.
You know, the reality is that the enemy
is always seeking to oppose the child of God.
The enemy is always seeking to oppose the child of God.
You read through the scriptures,
and you read of the men and women of God
who sought to do something for the Lord,
for the cause of exalting and magnifying
the name of the Lord, there's opposition that they face.
You think about the Apostle Paul when he speaks
about the open door that God has given,
but he says there are many adversaries.
And we face opposition in this life,
but we must understand and we must realize
that it's important for us to fix our attention
upon our Lord.
See, if we put too much of our focus upon the opposition,
if we put too much of our attention and our focus
upon the adversary, then we become overwhelmed.
We can become defeated.
We understand that our enemy wants to,
not only discourage us, our enemy wants to destroy us.
And there are times in which he will use adversity.
There are times in which he will use
the opposition of others to devour us.
We find here this evening that after Jacob
is aware of this hostility.
and after he hears the words,
and after he sees the countenance
in verse one and two of chapter 31,
I want you to see something just wonderful
because the Bible, the very next verse that we see,
the Bible says, and the Lord said unto Jacob.
I am thankful that when you hear the words
of the opposition, when you see the countenance
of the opposition, when you begin to face the hostility
that Jacob was going to encounter and endure,
that God speaks to his man.
You know, God uses his word.
Jacob did not have what we have in our hands this evening.
Genesis had not even been written yet,
for Moses was not yet on the scene, amen?
And the reality is that we have
the complete canon of Scripture,
and we go to this book and we begin
to open the pages of this book,
and guess what, God speaks to us.
He begins to reveal to us promises
and to remind us of promises,
and he gives us direction for our lives,
and when we face the opposition,
when we deal with the adversity,
oh, what a lesson for us to learn this evening
how we must run to this book,
and we must listen for the voice of God.
I've heard people say, God's just not speaking to me.
How much are we reading of his word?
Often, I found in my own life,
and I found in those lives of those
that have testified and I've interacted with,
that oftentimes, the problem isn't with God speaking.
The problem is with us as his servants hearing.
Amen?
Oftentimes, we're not hearing what God is saying.
We're not listening for that still, small voice.
We're not following the admonition
of the psalmist to be still
and to know that he is God.
And this evening, we find that in the midst
of all that was taking place
and all that was transpiring in the life of Jacob,
that the Lord speaks to Jacob.
How precious that is.
And it leads us to our third thought this evening,
the instruction from the Lord.
I would simply say that the instruction
is given in verse number three,
and it's simple instruction,
and it really follows with regard
to the desire that he's already expressed
as he spoke with Laban in verse 25.
And now here in verse number three,
notice the word of God.
It says, the Lord said unto Jacob,
return unto the land of thy fathers
and to thy kindred,
and I will be with thee.
Return.
The divine direction is given.
And it's interesting to me
that in the next several verses of Scripture,
really from verse four all the way down
to verse number 13,
that Jacob is now speaking to Rachel and Leah.
As Jacob is rehearsing the instruction
that he's received from the Lord,
we find that as we dig in
and we begin to examine that which Jacob
is communicating to Rachel and Leah
within the context of this conversation,
we find that we are reminded of some precious truth,
and really Jacob is reminding not only himself,
but he's reminding Rachel and Leah of this truth.
Notice as it begins in verse number four,
and Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah
to the field unto his flock and said unto them.
So again, as we look at these next verses
from verse number five here down through verse number 13,
Jacob is rehearsing.
He's given the information to Rachel and Leah
that he has received,
and notice what he says.
I see your father's countenance
that is not toward me as before.
Notice this first thing that he says,
but the God of my father hath been with me.
But the God of my father hath been with me.
We find that as we think about
the instruction that God has given,
and as we think about the way in which Jacob
is now communicating these things to Rachel and Leah,
we've already seen the plan of God.
Now we're seeing the presence of God.
We find that he testifies,
but the God of my father hath been with me.
Listen, there might be some folks that oppose us.
He says in the very text,
I see your father's countenance
that it's not toward me as before,
but God's been with me.
God's been with me.
Is that not what God promised?
Remember back in chapter 28,
I don't want to just belabor the point,
but notice in chapter 28 that God said in verse number 15,
behold, I am with thee.
What a precious promise of the Word of God.
We rejoice when we read of those
that have gone before us
that have received this same promise.
Think about this.
Turn to the book of Joshua, if you will,
in the first chapter,
and I want you to see how God encourages Joshua.
Moses is dead.
Joshua, the minister of Moses,
is now receiving instruction
and God speaks to him very plainly in verse number two.
He says, Moses, my servant is dead.
Now therefore, arise.
Go over this Jordan,
thou and all the people unto the land,
which I do give to them,
even the children of Israel.
Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon,
that have I given unto you,
as I said unto Moses.
Notice in verse number five,
there shall not be any man be able to stand before thee.
All the days of thy life.
Notice what he says,
as I was with Moses,
so I will be with thee.
I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee.
It's on the heels of that promise
that God then says, be strong
and have a good courage.
Man, when we know that God is with us,
we can be strong and have that courage
that God requires us to have
and gives us through that great promise.
Notice, if you will,
in the book of Jeremiah.
Turn to the book of Jeremiah
and look in the first chapter of the book of Jeremiah.
Now you understand that Jeremiah
was called to minister to the nation of Judah
during a very dark time in her history.
A time in which they had forsaken the Lord.
The Bible tells us it's a time
in which they had forgotten the Lord.
It's a time in which they followed idols.
Jeremiah is to stand and to prophesy
and to proclaim truth to this stiff-necked,
rebellious people.
And as God calls Jeremiah,
He says to him in verse number eight
of Jeremiah 1,
be not afraid of their faces.
Why?
For I am with thee
to deliver thee,
saith the Lord.
Man, I think that goes a long way
for Jeremiah to stand
to proclaim the messages that he proclaimed,
to face the opposition that he faced,
to be imprisoned as he was imprisoned
and left for dead.
Even as the people got together
and they counseled among themselves
that we're gonna kill Jeremiah.
There's no reason for him to live.
He says, listen, you do with me what you want.
You're accountable to God.
But he had this promise
that God said, I'm with you.
Turn to Matthew 28, if you will.
I mentioned already that we look at that promise
in Hebrews 13, and we should.
I want you to think about this tonight
as we, yes, are looking here at the life of Jacob
and looking at as he rehearses these things
to Rachel and Leah,
but how we're reminded even in our own lives
how God's promised us some things.
He's promised us His presence.
Notice in Matthew 28,
we're familiar with the passage in verse 18.
Jesus came and spake unto them saying,
all powers given unto me in heaven and in earth.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you.
And then notice this, and lo,
I am with you always.
Even unto the end of the world.
Amen.
He promises to go with us.
He promises His presence.
And as we learn the reality of His presence,
as we learn the power of His presence,
it ought to encourage us this evening.
It ought to encourage us to know
that God says, I'm with you.
It's not just a promise that's reserved for Jacob
or for Joshua or for Jeremiah
or one of the other multiple people
that we could look to the word of God this evening,
but it's a promise that's given to us
as the very people of God today.
That God says, I'm with you.
I'm with you.
And as Jacob is rehearsing back in Genesis 31,
he says to Rachel and Leah,
he says, listen, I know I can see
that your father's countenance, Laban,
he's not favorable towards me.
There's some hostility there,
but the God of my father hath been with me.
What a joy.
It was at the end of verse number three
when God spoke specifically to Jacob.
He says at the end, and I will be with thee.
And I will be with thee.
He's not only rehearsing it
for the purpose of informing them,
but you know, when we rehearse the promises of God,
we're also reminding ourselves of those very promises.
And it's good for us to remind ourselves
of the promises that God has given.
Notice as we continue, it says in verse six,
and you know that with all my power,
I have served your father.
My father hath deceived me and changed my wages ten times,
but God suffered him not to hurt me."
Aren't you thankful that God's in control?
God suffered him not to hurt me.
You know what that means?
God didn't allow him to hurt him.
God did not permit, He did not allow
for Laban to hurt Jacob.
Yes, he dealt with some adverse circumstances
and changes of wages and so on and so forth,
but God was in control.
Aren't you thankful this evening that God's in control?
Listen, there's nothing that can happen to you
that's outside of God's control.
When Jeremiah was thrown into that pit,
God was still in control.
When Daniel was thrown into that den of lions,
When Shadrach, Meshach, you get the point, right?
God's always in control.
He continues and he says in verse 8,
if He said thus, the speckled shall be thy wages,
all the cattle bear speckled.
And if He said thus, the ring strake shall be thy hire,
then bear all the cattle ring strake.
Again, we looked at verse 9 a moment ago.
Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father
and given them to me.
And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived
that I lifted up mine eyes and saw in a dream
and behold the rams which leaped upon the cattle
were ring strake speckled and gristled.
And the angel of God spoken to me in a dream saying,
Jacob, and I said, here am I.
And he said, lift up now thine eyes
and see all the rams which leap upon the cattle
were ring strake speckled and gristled.
For I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
Pause there just for a moment.
Aren't you thankful that God's aware of what we face?
God says to Jacob, which says in verse 11,
that the angel of God spoken to me in a dream
and what the angel of the Lord said to Jacob
at the end of the verse is that God says,
I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
You know, sometimes in life,
we get this kind of approach to life
and this perspective that no one understands.
No one sees what I'm dealing with.
No one understands the difficulty that I'm facing.
Can I encourage you this evening that God sees,
that God knows, that God is aware of what we're dealing with?
And can I encourage you this evening
that I'm more encouraged by knowing that God knows
than if you know?
Sometimes as human beings, we'd rather each other know
so that we can get some pity,
so that we can get some whatever we need to get,
but really we find great refuge and great comfort
in knowing that God is aware.
Because when God is aware,
He can do more than all of you can do collectively, right?
Think about the children of Israel in the book of Exodus.
He heard their crying.
He knew that there was a new Pharaoh that rose up.
He knew what they were dealing with and He was aware.
And as God comes and He appears and He speaks to Moses,
you know what He says to them?
I've seen their affliction.
God knew about it.
He was aware of it.
Well, then why didn't you step in and stop it?
Because He has a plan.
And as I've often said from this pulpit,
and I think it was adequately said this morning
from this pulpit,
there are times in which God will take us through a storm
instead of delivering us from a storm.
And as He takes us through the storm,
you know what He's doing?
He's delivering us through that storm.
And as we're delivered through that storm,
we come out on the other side knowing more about God
than we ever would have known about God.
And God says to Jacob,
I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
Sometimes we can just sit around and say,
nobody understands.
Nobody knows.
Can I encourage you tonight that God knows?
God knows.
That should encourage our hearts tonight.
That should comfort us.
Verse 13, I am the God of Bethel,
where thou anointest the pillar.
He's talking back about chapter 28.
We've looked at that multiple times already this evening,
and He's really looking at verses,
the latter part of the text,
looking at verses 18 and 19.
But notice what He says,
in where thou vowest a vow unto me.
Now arise, get thee out from this land
and return unto the land of thy kindred.
We find that we've been encouraged
as we've looked at this instruction,
as Jacob is rehearsing these things to Rachel and Leah,
we've been reminded of God's plan.
I'm thankful that God always has a plan.
Sometimes we just gotta figure out what God's plan is.
Sometimes we don't really see all of it,
we don't know,
and God's not given us all the blueprint,
if you will, up front.
He just, sometimes He just calls us
to follow Him step by step.
Day by day, we sang the song Not Long Ago,
and you think about how as we walk with God,
it's a day by day journey,
and He's revealing His plan one step at a time.
I'm thankful that God did not give me
all of the grace in one day
that I would need for all of my Christian journey,
but He gives me the grace that I need day by day.
Day by day.
His grace and His mercy
for the plan that He has for my life.
We've seen about His presence,
we've understood this evening,
as we've looked at this passage,
that God is in control.
Laban could not do anything to Jacob
that God did not permit him to do,
and then God is aware.
Aren't those some encouraging realities?
But these are not realities just for Jacob,
they're realities for us as well.
And we think about the passage of Scripture,
and we think about this rehearsing of Jacob
to Rachel and Leah.
I want you to see that now Rachel and Leah
in the latter part of what we're studying this evening
in verses 14 through 16,
there's a response here from them.
It says in verse 14,
"'And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him,
"'Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us
"'in our father's house?
"'Are we not counted of him strangers?
"'For he hath sold us and hath quite devoured
"'also our money.
"'For all the riches which God hath taken from our father,
"'that is ours and our children's.'"
But then notice what it says,
"'Now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.'"
I like the last part of the verse
because really in verses 14 through 16,
as Rachel and Leah are responding,
they're sharing some things,
they're sharing their perspective,
but we find that at the end of their comment,
they say, "'Now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.'"
Let me say this tonight,
as we think about that statement from Rachel and Leah,
let me say it from two perspectives.
Number one is this,
when we know what God's told us to do, we better do it.
Amen?
When we know what God has told us to do, we better do it.
We better be obedient to God.
But let me say this also,
when we can adequately communicate to someone else
what God has instructed us to do,
we have the ability of convincing them
that we are convinced ourselves of what God wants us to do
and we can garner their support.
Because here, listen, if Jacob says,
"'Well, you know, I'm not really sure
"'and it's kind of this wishy-washy approach
"'and like, you know, what should we do?
"'Let's get out some paper
"'and write down all the pros over here
"'and all the cons over here
"'and we're just really gonna kind of put out a fleece
"'and so on and so forth.'"
No, no, Jacob is communicating to Rachel and Leah
what God has told him to do.
God said, arise and return.
And when he was so convinced of what God's plan was
and he was able to effectively communicate,
here's what God has instructed me to do,
there's this response,
"'Whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.'"
And I like that.
Because the reality is that
if God's told you to do something,
if God's told me to do something,
we better obey God.
We think about decisions that we make in our lives.
Times have gone in the past where people will come
and seek to counsel with me.
It's not just me, but obviously,
people have counseled with pastors over the years.
And there are times in which I have said,
and I know others have as well
through conversation that I've had with them,
something like this.
If that's what God's told you to do,
then you better do it.
Why?
Because I'm not trying to get in the way of God.
Amen?
And when God gives us that clarity,
when God reveals to us His plan
and He communicates with us,
and then we're able to communicate that plan
that God has for our lives to others,
we can garner their support.
I think about Brother Baloo this morning.
Do you have any doubt in your mind
that God's called him to Idaho?
No doubt in my mind whatsoever.
I mean, if he got up here and was presenting his ministry
and just kind of like,
well, you know, I'm just kind of gonna try it out
and see this and that,
know, I'm kind of keeping my, I'm not, I'm not sure that God's clearly communicated
to you because you're obviously not able to clearly communicate to us what God's called
you to do. But Jacob is able to stand and rehearse. And it's because in that time of
difficulty and that time of adversity after the Bible speaks about his increasing greatly
that the Lord spoke to him. I hope this evening that we'd hold tight to the promises of God.
I hope this evening that we would understand the reality of His presence and that we would
be encouraged and comforted through the truth of His presence, that God does have a plan,
that He is aware of your circumstance, of your situation, and that everything that we
encounter in life, God's in control. There are times in which we say, it's all falling
apart. How in the world? God's in control. God has a purpose. God has a plan. And He
delivers us through and He strengthens us. And there are times as we look at the truth
of 2 Corinthians 1 that we are comforted by the God of all comfort so that we then can
comfort others with the same comfort that we have received. And that's a great truth
of ministry within the household of faith. Let's pray. Father, we love You. We thank
You for loving us. We thank You for this passage of Scripture. And as we overview these circumstances,
these events that lead to the departure of Jacob from that land to go back to Canaan,
it's more than just historical fact that is provided. There is precious truth that You've
revealed that encourages even us this evening. I'm thankful that as we've looked at these
promises and these realities in the life of Jacob that we can understand that these truths
are applicable in our lives as well. I pray that You'd help us to rest in Thee. Lord,
help us to listen for the voice of God through Your precious book that You would reveal to
us Your plan. That we'd say, even as Samuel of old said, speak Lord, for Thy servant heareth.
The idea of that word is to hear with the intent of obedience. God, I pray that You'd
encourage Your people this evening through this passage of Scripture as we've highlighted
some of these wonderful promises. We claim them for our own. We'd go out with renewed vision and
passion to serve You, to make a difference in this lost and dying world. We commit these moments to
You and ask that You'd move and work as only You can. For it's in Christ's name we pray.